I bunderson it's just one of these
things what does the word abolition
really mean what does the word sanctuary
really mean I mean it's surreal the
whole thing it's it's I I understand
completely the sentimentality behind it
I myself as a vegan i do care about
animals but for me what makes sense is
having animals die in the wild where
other animals eat their corpse after
they're dead it doesn't make sense to me
to reproduce half of the problems with a
farm and half of the problems of the zoo
and to promote this animal sanctuary
model as the solution to all our
problems but with this boy sort of a
little gray area when it comes to
rewriting first line yeah I'm never
reload first ever oh my gosh I've never
been in the position where do I go
somebody I'll did me and on the track
why I had to rewrite my first I never
even given given again that ultimately
we have priorities we have limited
amounts of money and everything else if
I have the two hundred thousand dollars
just even to compare the two humble
examples okay buy a plot of land and
open an animal sanctuary versus open a
restaurants a vegan restaurant downtown
somewhere let's say it's a vegan
restaurant with a gym or something
upstairs you know whatever and promote
veganism you know to human beings uh to
me you know the second option is much
more meaningful as much more likely to
really have a dynamic change in the
world but still I mean I do understand
why people want to have these these
sanctuaries when I was in France I knew
a couple of really hardcore vegan
activists the one guy he had formerly
been an employee of pettah for years
they both just had years and years of
experience with vegan activist of
different kinds everything from giving
pamphlets to lectures to showing movies
they've done all kinds of vegan vegan
activism and you know they also would go
and volunteer at a sanctuary once in a
while and they just said the reality of
this sanctuary is because they don't
kill the animals so they accept a
certain number of animals and it's very
finite
how many horses can you really take care
of for real-time money labor the food
for the horses can you can you keep five
forces maybe that's your capacity okay
so you accept five horses and a certain
number of dogs and a certain number of
cats and a certain number of pigs and
that's it and then the door is closed
and those animals live for years and
years until they die and then after that
people including the people who donate
money to you because somebody who's
donated thousands of dollars to you
phones you up and says look we've
rescued this pig or the Sheep some
circumstances there's the Sheep maybe
it's a deer there's this animal in these
circumstances anchor we want the dev put
slip and you say no we can't help you
we're already full and then the animal
inevitably is either sent to a kill
shelter so a shelter where it's kept
alive for a couple of days for skilled
or it's just shot in the head it hope
this is the depressing day-to-day
reality of animal sanctuary whether it's
horses or whether they just do dogs or
cats or what have you as I say for me
the actual lives the animals that are on
the sanctuary for me again it's better
than some farms but it's it's very
similar to some other farms including
you know something like a petting zoo
you know I think it's very very similar
to a petting zoo normal which what you
get in the sanctuary so once we get past
it's just one of these things what does
the word abolition really mean what does
the word sanctuary really mean can we
can we think about this in practice and
then can we make decisions about our own
own priorities and what have you in life
you talked about how you talked about on
that you understand nostalgia behind the
idea of the animal sanctuary I'm
wondering where do you think that comes
from do you think that comes from you
know I I mean what I think of us I think
of you know you grow up you you see the
movie about the griller the chimpanzee
that you know someone buys like the
airport like coming home from Africa or
some trip or something and it gets too
big and then it goes to live on the
beautiful plate it's the beautiful
forest the beautiful reserved and it has
this amazing life that's implied at the
end of the movie rid of your thoughts on
that so look I'm going to I'm going to
come out of the closet on this one I
never mention this on my youtube channel
before I don't think I mentioned the
Internet I literally grew up with the
sound of lions roaring in the background
in my childhood in Canada because there
was uh not a zoo there was an open plain
reserve I'm not going to say sanctuary
specifically for wild African animals in
the part of Canada where I I had a very
memorable part of my childhood so this
is obviously rural Canada and obviously
that facility was there because the land
was cheap so these are really early
childhood memories for me but like the
other businesses in that part of Canada
were like there was a huge jail so there
were people there is like some of the
other kids in my school their parents
worked in the jail it's all the type of
stuff you put in an area where the land
is cheap empty and worthless and I would
literally fall asleep was within earshot
you know of lions roaring and my parents
never once took me to see the Lions I
never saw them but I heard them and on a
really deep in state you'll level you
know the sound of a lion roaring at a
distance it's not that different from
Thunder on the horizon but you feel
differently about it on a level of
instinct I think you do respond to it as
you know this is a threat this is
something I need to pay attention to so
I remember waking up in the middle night
not feeling scared just feeling alert
waking up as a kid to that rumbling roar
clients in the distance now where was
where was i living at that time as a
child and again I think this impacted my
view I i I'm not going to say too much
about impacted my view of animals and
ecology and what of civilization at that
time my childhood I was living on a fake
farm so it was a farm that existed as an
historical recreation it was a farm that
was created partly so the government
could preserve historical architecture
Canada we don't have much historical
architecture so ever so often there'd be
a building and they'd say well this
building is 200 years old let instead of
destroying it let's relocate it let's
actually dig up the building
this special place and they put a bunch
of these buildings together and then
they decided to recreate the other
elements of what life was like in that
period of canada's first colonization by
europeans so you know they put up a
fence and had some sheep and they
actually showed the type of machinery
that people used in that period of how
they made sheep's wool into a useful
type of wool they would have this kind
of demonstration exhibition there were
other kind of primitive technologies of
the frontier settlement Aaron cannon so
I got to see these animals that were in
some ways ludicrously happy because they
want to fake farm they were not really
being exploited they were just there to
exist so you got to see sheep you know
acting like sheep and you got to see you
know obviously sorry we should obviously
these were not wild sheep they're not
know this is fella still a farm was a
totally fake farm and there were some
horses but the horses didn't really do
much and what have you so you know they
they owned these animals but it is
really like animals in a museum
exhibition and they're animals that just
fundamentally were not suffering and not
being exploited although still of course
they're not living in anything like like
wild conditions it's also not anything
like a zoo so there I've come out of the
closet J on my early childhood
experience with animals and animal
agriculture and zoos and specifically
even Lions that did it gave me a really
really strange starting point for how I
viewed human beings animals living
together and what I thought of his
normal agriculture and I just say you
know I'm literally on the horizon like
when my father would drive me to school
which didn't happen every day I just
mentioned normally take a take a bus to
school this is rural Canada you know
school bus would come and collect you
but on some days my father would drive
me I can remember my father drive me and
literally on the horizon you would see
this dull gray metal shed and that was
the dawn of you know industrial chicken
farming it was a huge shed you know the
current what's now you see everywhere
but I gamera my father saying
you know when I was child we didn't have
that when I was jailed that didn't exist
you know raising chickens in a factory
like that this this high-density a
chicken coop technology and so actually
you did see around you the
transformation of the landscape to
reflect a new and darker era of the
exploitation of animals I just think I
was just thinking that you're telling
the story about the Lions and the Sheik
I wonder on only other chic spells about
right yes yes I mixed them with another
population sheep like that had never
been with the Lions like what their
behaviors would be different then like I
wonder like how wonder if they drip
represent more like some of this in some
ways that represent more like real
living a wild like you know undulates on
like the Savannah you know lion looking
over your shoulder cuz they are these
great predators that although they never
see them may be there maybe they're just
like oh what's that sound but um yes I
ok you see you see what I'm so
anthropocentric I never thought of that
I never thought that the other animals
living so close to me they also were
probably not sleeping very well on those
nights when I was walking up I Roerig ya
know I wonder I wonder if there's
something I wonder if there's something
in a prey animals DNA here the the side
of a predator and even if they don't
know what it is you know they know
there's something wrong and that's
something that they grow up with that's
more real more wild than any other you
know example of that what so so far as I
know in terms of evolutionary time I
mean human beings did evolve in pretty
much the same ecological niche as as
lions so it's not surprising that on
some level we can just respond to a lion
roaring and think this is a problem some
some instinct you know certainly you
know lion roaring is a frightening thing
I wonder if you and I are the cuz I you
know I worked with lines I worked around
them and I wonder if I'm the other
vegans are there to say that they felt
that they felt that I described as waves
pulsating waves do you even feel it
through the structure yeah I mean I just
remember
cats are cats are scary I remember on
there's one line that he liked to roar
and keepers faces and they're on their
their keepers that worked there for
years there were like you don't honestly
what he does that I still jump yeah you
know cuz like it's like a slow thing
like he would turn he would go to the
back of the stall and they would slowly
turn like when you were checking a lock
or something like that readers and then
like all of a sudden like he's back and
all of a sudden he's right there I think
so so we have this in common Jay you and
i you were saying before we have so much
in common maybe this way anyway you know
I just mentioned obviously most of my
critics are not worth responding to but
you know one of the statements I made
that's been I've been attacked for that
but misunderstood for I talked about it
not just endangered species but some
endangered breeds of animals so you know
sometimes the breeds were created by
human being sometimes they just came
about you know through the happenstance
of nature where I said that yes actually
I do think that governments can have a
role in preventing some some breeds of
animals from disappearing from the world
you know I would hope it's not in a
circus or not anything to exploited them
but I thought that in a museum like
capacity we can keep some populations of
animals alive because you know
meat-eaters and sometimes vegans ask
this question well what about
domesticated animals that can't return
to the wild that can't exist in the wild
you know should they disappear entirely
and I say no I think there's a museum
like you know capacity to keep these
these things alive so it is funny but in
my own childhood I did actually live in
a museum of that kind you know the
animals were really only a small part of
it but it was it was really a museum for
the lifestyle of how human beings exist
at that time now overall you know did
that make me become vegan faster or
slower actually it probably delayed my
becoming vegan because it gave me a
sense of respect for tradition and as
you know veganism is such a such a
challenge to tradition but on this on
this issue I mean I think that's why I
always talk about the wildlife
management paradigm wildlife management
I'm not saying back to the wilderness
you know i'm not saying primitivism i'm
not saying Deep Ecology not saying I'm
definitely not an anarchy
primitive s uh you know when human
beings manage wildlife they have to ask
questions again this is not even a zoo
not a zoo but genuinely wild animals
human beings have to keep track how many
wolves are there how many deer are there
sometimes there are too many wolves
sometimes there are too many deer
sometimes you know you've dealt with
this with Wolves you get these
ridiculous questions of are these
coyotes really coyotes or of the Coyotes
interbred too much with the wolves and
they're not coyotes anymore getting
ridiculous questions of trying to keep
different you know breeds and species
alive but that's you know that's
wildlife management that's the reality I
think if we're talking with the future
21st century in the 25th century I think
what we really need to look at again zoo
zoos are still interesting and you know
obviously all the other issues abolition
of you know evolution of meat and
leather or period I think the obviously
an enormous challenge next 400 years but
I mean here and now I just kind of can't
put enough emphasis on trying to make
wildlife management the paradigm not
pets not animal sanctuaries which to me
in some ways are a type of pet keeping
or type of zoo or what have you but for
us to kind of face up to those realities
which include to be blunt ultimately
include killing animals ultimately any
wildlife management even if you're even
if you are met you you've got the
spirits wolves even if your purpose is
to save the wolves sometimes you end up
killing wolves and that may be brutal
and terrible you may literally go home
and weep over it or have nightmares
about it you know but that that's part
of the game that's also part of all that
man I've actually I've actually I
remember on what I one of the wolf
facilities that i worked at we actually
we had on this was one of the this is
one of the places where we'd actually
accept wild animals that had died to
feed through our animals when I got in
the zoo field late later that started to
disappear um but I remember one one day
there was I'm actually a wildlife
official who actually he brought you
know I found this dear you know it's
dead it looks all right to me you guys
can look over it if you'd like but I'm I
thought I would drop it by you know I
know you guys are small facility I know
you know if you guys can have extra food
but he sat down he actually talked to me
and um I mean my idea I had never met a
wildlife official who had you know was
dealing with management responsibilities
in those areas worlds have been
reintroduced I honestly at that time you
know I was you know learning all this
information to talk to our visitors
about about the wolf reintroduction
program and stuff like that and I was
under the assumption that every single
wildlife manager was you know a fan of
wolves you know that they were working
towards you know facilitating you know
they return the wild and getting them
used you know gain them back in there
and this this individual was not a fan
of wolves you know he stated you know
that you know wolves kill
indiscriminately you know not
necessarily just to eat they just kill
cuz they liked it that was something he
actually said and that you know he had
killed wolves himself and that you know
he thought that you know all these
renters they had legitimate point he
actually told me that I'm cuz they what
they did in the United States was they
actually set up I don't know if some guy
I don't remember if it was a government
organization or some rich people
literally donated money that say you
know if you can prove that you know you
lost cattle to wolves you know we'll pay
you this much worth of the worth the
animal I think it was something like a
hundred fifty percent of like the
animals worth or something like that um
he actually his official opinion on that
was that the money it all dried up and
that people didn't get paid you know
what they were supposed to be worth I I
looked it up but I was like you know it
appears to be this is still going from
every source so I wasn't at the time I
wasn't sure what he was talking about
I'm I can be frank I thought he was a
blithering idiot um but um but you know
I think there's not not every well like
manager you know you know killing is you
know is an aspect and you know you're
gonna get different you know pins on it
some guys were absolutely for it and
some level there's a malevolent suspect
in there sure sure but I mean it's also
like anything else like when you do real
humanitarian work in a country like Laos
I never had this attitude but like the
point is not to regard Lao people as
angels if you actually work with poverty
stricken people and starving people
they're [ __ ] like everyone else
you know what I mean and they're
cheating on their wives and they're
going to the brothel or their gambling
addicts and some of them are drug
addicts and yes some of them are poor
and they're nice people but some of them
are poor and they're poor for a reason
they're poor because they made terrible
decisions in their lives and some of
them are war criminals some of them are
poor and you're giving them food and
you're helping them not starve or you're
helping them access job training so they
go and they literally have committed
crimes against humanity that's what they
did with a couple decades of their lives
they were mercenaries in local wars or
what have you that's helping poor people
is helping people because they're poor
not because they're nice not because you
like them not because they're angels so
in the same way I mean like people who
actually work with animals are going to
know these kinds of contradictions and
have these kinds of mixed feelings
because they've seen both sides of it
you know they've seen they've seen many
many dif different sides of it you know
I read an account so I've told you
before my work on First Nations
indigenous people north america american
indians it was almost entirely on the
the korean a jib way but i did i did do
some reading about other other groups
another native group further west i read
a really interesting first-person
account this was fry this is in an
academic peer-reviewed journal but the
interesting part was this guy speaking
was basically you know from an interview
and he said that in his tribe and in his
region of Canada he was the last person
to do mercy killings of bears which she
said like a hundred years earlier was a
proud tradition in his tribe I'll tell
you exactly what that means because this
is very interesting question for vegans
and for wildlife manager what have you
apparently often enough you know adult
bears are injured with something like a
broken leg they fall in that part of
Canada anyway they fall off a cliff or
something happens they have an injury
that they can't recover from and they
are very dangerous in that state and
they are howling with rage and howling
with pain they scream and scream and
anything that comes close to them they
will kill because you know obviously
they have no no medication they're just
an extreme physical pain and of course
what will kill them is graduate
starving to death if they're just left
out in out in the wild and his tribe his
his ethnic group in Canada they had a
tradition that in the past they were
proud of of hunters going to kill those
bears out of mercy not to take the meat
not to take the skin but so that that
bear would not die an incredibly long
slow horrible death now as you can
imagine because these bears are making a
lot of noise you know they would track
them mostly just by the by the sound but
the men who did this this was considered
the highest level of hunter he said
maybe a good look I know maybe this guy
is lying you know I'm assuming this is
all true but whatever anyway this guy is
speaking for his own his own culture
addition but he said that was highly
respected as the highest level of a
hunter who takes on that responsibility
because it was also acknowledged to be
extremely dangerous like once you got
close to that bear even if it had a
broken leg because it was in such an
adrenaline-filled state that bear could
still charge at you could still try to
kill you you know with its it's dying
strength or what have you in this in
this state of excruciating pain Sam you
know what is wildlife management I mean
you know we're in a situation now where
guys like Gary Yourofsky endorse
violence in what you know ways that are
completely repugnant to me talk about
violence against you know meat-eaters
basically but at the same time they
claim they literally do not kill insects
and that vegans just by becoming vegan
we can live in a magical fairy Kingdom
where nobody has to kill animals and
where there are no hard questions of
this kind so as you know I mean I'm the
one voice I'm intensely hated by so many
for this on youtube where I say no I
really want to talk about I really want
to talk with these contradictions I want
to deal with contradictions whether
they're in medical science and that kind
of research or in wildlife management or
you know or even I'm willing to MIT
every time I eat a piece of bread that
piece of bread kills insects and it
kills mammals it kills animals like
Gophers and groundhogs and enormous
numbers when we grow wheat in Canada you
think we don't kill anything we kill all
kinds of stuff so you know
in my video I talked about killing
animals i mentioned one individual who
was responsible for you not this one
facility that got all these [ __ ]
donations I was responsible for killing
you know the horses that had all these
little tricks that he learned in order
to get the horses to be in the right
position nerd of him to deal the one
shot and then in the end he was the one
who butchered all the animals is it
individual was Native American oh really
no kidding okay that is very interesting
so he really felt more comfortable with
that process the killing in the butchery
than than other people yeah absolutely
he was he was even the one who on the
lands like he would he would be the one
like if we Etta because one of the
things and I've talked about this a
little bit with mice you know the
reality that you kill mice is a zoo
keeper um because and because of you
know pestilence getting in affecting
your collection you know there are other
animals larger animals that this was a
drive-thru park you know there are all
kinds of animals that could get in there
and stuff like that you know and you
know make roofs that you didn't really
want had there that could hurt wildlife
not just get them sick hurt them I mean
he was the one who kind of like no sod
all those animals up to tracking so much
speed and like try to figure out the
best way to remove them and stuff like
that there were no clear he was very
well respected I don't even think he had
to do he did some cleaning Bree even
quite do it the right way but everyone
who goes to school of it because he was
you know he had these abilities that no
one else had um yeah and look that's why
i say management i mean it's it's a
bloody mess but i think nobody will
admit it if you run an animal sanctuary
all those things are going to be true
right you can change the name from a zoo
to a sanctuary you think you don't have
to kill rats honest if you're running if
you're a vegan running an animal
sanctuary you don't have to kill rats or
it could be owls or anything else or
pigeons you know even a seemingly
harmless animal like pigeons well if you
have a bunch of pigeons moving into your
sanctuary and messing things up the end
other animals what do you do it could be
bees could be Hornets whatever i mean
you know uh i think you have all the
same contradictions as on a zoo or in a
or in a farm you know
ablution